Another major feature of state
charts are parallel states.
So when David Harrell invented
state charts in 1987, give or
take, two of the main features
were orthogonality and hierarchy.
So the hierarchy comes with compound
states where you could have
this hierarchy of states, and
this orthogonality represents
just many states that can
be active at the same time.
Now you might be thinking to yourself,
wait a minute,
finite state machines, I thought that
the number one rule was that you can
only be in exactly one
state at any given time.
And that's still true even
with parallel states.
So what we're gonna be modeling over here,
I'll just show you
an example in Excalidraw,
is we have all of these different states,
we have loading and ready.
But let's say that we also want to control
the volume in the same state machine.
So, Whether it's loading or playing or
paused or in this ready state,
it doesn't matter.
The volume can still be muted and
unmuted at any time.
It sort of lives independently
from all of these states.
So what we would have to do,
if we were trying to represent
this strictly as a state machine,
is we would have to have, and
let me just change this color real quick.
We would have to have
a loadingMuted state.
And a loadingUnmuted state,
I'm gonna spell that right, unmuted.
And we would have to have all
of the states like this too.
We would have to have playingMuted,
playingUnmuted.
PauseMuted, pausedUnmuted.
And so now you see that our three states
have multiplied into six different states.
And so now if we have to represent
something else such as whether the media
player is expanded or collapsed,
now you're multiplying this by two again.
And then if you want to represent
different states, such as if you if you
decide to represent something being liked,
unliked, or disliked.
Now you're multiplying all
those states by three, and
this is where state explosion happens.
So that's why with both compounds
state and parallel state,
we can really manage and prevent
this state explosion from happening.
So the way we do this is instead of
creating a combination of all those
states, like a Mexican or
a Chinese restaurants where it's just like
a menu full of 100 different meal options,
which are really just combinations
of the same eight ingredients.
We're going to represent
these as parallel states.
So, the way we do that is by
creating what are called regions,
and don't be scared by the term regions,
it's just a way of saying,
just child parallel state.
So let's say that we have this
entire machine as a parallel state,
and we have two separate regions, and
again think of regions as states,
we have this which
represents the media player.
And then we have a separate region,
which represents the volume.
And so, this volume can be muted,
it's really small, or it could be unmuted.
And so both of these states can
transition between each other.
We could have muted going to unmuted, or
unmuted going to muted, so just like this.
And these are just on different events,
either the mute,
the unmute, or we could have
a volume.toggle event as well.
Ad so in xstate, the way that you
represent these parallel states
is by specifying the state
node as type of parallel.
So let's go back to our example machine
here and just create a little example.
So instead of providing an initial state,
I'm just going to provide type
parallel on the machine itself.
Now we're gonna specify
our states as normal, but
these states are going
to be parallel states.
So we could have,
I'm gonna have something for,
let's say mode, and so
our state can be dark mode, or light mode.
And initially, we're gonna do light mode,
and then we might have another
parallel state for display.
So initial on, states on, off.
And so now you see that this is what
these parallel states look like.
We're both in the display on state,
and the mode light state.
Now we could go back and
forth between the mode light and
dark state without affecting the display,
or we could go back and
forth between the on and off states in
display without affecting the mode.
Or the same event can be handled by
states inside this parallel region,
and this parallel region, so
you might have multiple transitions
happening at the same time.
Again, just like compound states, parallel
states are an organizational technique for
reducing the number of states and
transitions in your state machine.